Partial draft of SLEP014: parameter spaces on estimators (#62)
scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals: slep014/proposal.rst

.. _slep_014:

=======================================
SLEP014: Parameter Spaces on Estimators
=======================================

:Author: Joel Nothman
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-11-30

Abstract
--------

This proposes to simplify the specification of parameter searches by allowing

> the user to store candidate values for each parameter on each estimator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the user to store candidate values for each parameter on the corresponding estimator.
```

The ``*SearchCV`` estimators would then have a setting to construct the

> parameter grid or distribution from a traversal of the supplied estimator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter grid or distribution from supplied estimator itself.
```
The grid-search probably wouldn't have to do the traversal and it's an implementation detail anyway?

Author: ```suggestion
parameter grid or distribution from the supplied estimator.
```

Detailed description
--------------------

The ability to set and get parameters from deep within nested estimators using
``get_params`` and ``set_params`` is powerful, but the specification of
parameter spaces to search can be very unfriendly for users.
In particular, the structure of the parameter grid specification needs to

> reflect the structure of the estimator, with every path explicitly notated with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reflect the structure of the estimator, with every path explicitly specified by
```

``__``-separated elements.

For example, `one example <https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/d4d5f8c/examples/compose/plot_compare_reduction.py>`__
proposes searching over alternative preprocessing steps in a Pipeline and their

> parameters, as well as the parameters of the downstream classifier.

Reviewer: Do you want to make it worse by adding gamma? Also, this is actually a cheating example because the n_features option is sort-of shared so it's a bit easier than the more general case lol.

Reviewer: uh also adding a column transformer would be "fun" lol do we have any examples with gridsearchcv + columntransformer?

Author: I don't think introducing a more pathological case is super helpful here.... The example in `plot_compare_reduction` has `NMF` too which I removed to simplify the story here. But we can comment on trickier cases below.

Maybe it makes more sense to alternate the end classifier than the preprocessing?

            "reduce_dim": [PCA(iterated_power=7)],
            "reduce_dim__n_components": N_FEATURES_OPTIONS,
            "classify__C": C_OPTIONS,
        },
        {
            "reduce_dim": [SelectKBest(chi2)],
            "reduce_dim__k": N_FEATURES_OPTIONS,
            "classify__C": C_OPTIONS,
        },
    ]

Here we see that in order to specify the search space for the 'k' parameter of
``SelectKBest``, the user needs to identify its fully qualified path from the
root estimator (``pipe``) that will be passed to the grid search estimator,
i.e. ``reduce_dim__k``.  To construct this fully qualified parameter name, the
user must know that the ``SelectKBest`` estimator resides in a ``Pipeline``
step named ``reduce_dim`` and that the Pipeline is not further nested in
another estimator. Changing the name of ``reduce_dim`` would entail a change to
5 lines in the above code snippet.

We also see that the options for ``classify__C`` need to be specified twice.
Were the candidate values for ``C`` something that belonged to the
``LinearSVC`` estimator instance, rather than part of a grid specification, it
would be possible to specify it only once. The use of a list of two separate

> dicts of parameter spaces is altogether avoidable, where the only reason the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dicts of parameter spaces is altogether avoidable, as the only reason the
```

parameter space is duplicated is to handle the alternation of one step in the
pipeline; for all other steps, it makes sense for the candidate parameter
space to remain constant regardless of whether ``reduce_dim`` is a feature
selector or a PCA.

> Here we propose to allow the user to specify candidates or distributions for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SLEP proposes to allow the user to specify candidates or distributions for
```

local parameters on a specific estimator estimator instance::

    svc = LinearSVC(dual=False, max_iter=10000).set_grid(C=C_OPTIONS)
    pipe = Pipeline(
        [
            # the reduce_dim stage is populated by the param_grid
            ("reduce_dim", "passthrough"),
            ("classify", svc),
        ]
    ).set_grid(reduce_dim=[
        PCA(iterated_power=7).set_grid(n_components=N_FEATURES_OPTIONS),
        SelectKBest().set_grid(k=N_FEATURES_OPTIONS),
    ])

With this use of ``set_grid``, ``GridSearchCV(pipe)`` would not need the
parameter grid to be specified explicitly. Instead, a recursive descent through
``pipe``'s parameters allows it to reconstruct exactly the grid used in the
example above.

Such functionality therefore allows users to:

* easily define a parameter space together with the estimator they relate to,
  improving code cohesion.
* establish a library of estimator configurations for reuse, reducing repeated

>   code, and reducing setup costs for auto-ML approaches.

Author: ```suggestion
  code, and reducing setup costs for auto-ML approaches. As such, this change
  helps to enable :issue:`5004`.
```

* avoid work modifying the parameter space specification when a composite
  estimator's strucutre is changed, or a Pipeline step is renamed.
* more comfortably specify search spaces that include the alternation of a
  step in a Pipeline (or ColumnTransformer, etc.), creating a form of

>   conditional dependency in the search space.

Reviewer: Even if you disagree with us shipping default parameters in sklearn, I would link the relevant issue and say that this is an enabler. https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/5004

Implementation
--------------

TODO

setter, getter for grid.
setter, getter for distribution.
Overwriting behaviour

Private attribute on estimator, dynamically allocated on request

Grid Search update to handle param_grid='extract' using the algorithm

> and implementation from searchgrid [1]_. If an empty grid is extracted

Author: ```suggestion
and implementation from searchgrid [1]_. If an empty grid is extracted
an error should be raised.
```

> Randomized Search update to handle param_distributions='extract', using ``get_grid``

Reviewer: I can't parse this sentence.

Author: The previous sentence wasn't complete. Thanks for noting before I forgot its intention!

only to update the results of ``get_distribution``.

Parameter spaces should be copied in clone, so that a user can overwrite only
one parameter's space without redefining everything.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

No concerns

Alternatives
------------

TODO

no methhods, but storing on est
GridFactory (:issue:`21784`)

Alternative syntaxes

one call per param?

> duplicate vs single method for grid vs  distbn

Reviewer: the name grid doesn't really apply to distributions, so ``set_grid`` is maybe not ideal? ``set_search_space`` is a bit longer though?

Author: I think it would be `set_param_space` if we adopt that nomenclature.

Presently, I'm in favour of having separate methods: `{set,get}_grid`, `{set,get}_distrib`. Why? it's more explicit, and it does a better job of enabling automl options by using fallback from distrib to grid.

make_pipeline alternative or extension to avoid declaring 'passthrough'

searchgrid [1]_, Neuraxle [2]_

Discussion
----------

raised in :issue:`19045`.

:issue:`9610`: our solution does not directly meet the need for conditional

> dependencies within a single estimator, e.g::

Reviewer: There is a separate complaint there about sharing parameters across estimators, which I think should also be listed here.

    param_grid = [
        {
            "kernel": ["rbf"],
            "gamma": [.001, .0001],
            "C": [1, 10],
        },
        {
            "kernel": ["linear"],
            "C": [1, 10],
        }
    ]

> 

Reviewer: One thought I had: can you use ``__`` in ``set_grid``? Nested parameters behave just like any other parameters in the rest of sklearn, so it would be natural to support it.

But then it's a bit unclear what happens if you specify parameters twice, like if you specify 
``PCA(iterated_power=7).set_grid(n_components=N_FEATURES_OPTIONS)`` but also specify ``pipeline.set_grid(reduce_dim__n_components=[2, 3, 4])``, which one takes precedence?

How is that handled in searchgrid?

Author: Good point, although I'm not 100% sure I care for being able to use `__`. We should certainly note this issue here.

Author: Being able to use `__` might be powerful if nested estimators need the same parameter spaces... But I don't like its ambiguity, and banning `__` at least until its need is established might be the sane way to go.

Author: I think for now we should require that `set_grid` only operate on params from `get_params(deep=False)`

Reviewer: I agree. Sorry, apparently my slep review cycle is 4 months now :-/
